IPIP 298: (allow|deny)lists for IPFS Nodes and Gateways (#340)
ipfs/specs: IPIP/0298-denylists-for-ipfs-nodes-and-gateways.md

  IPFS Node->>List Provider: ipfs://<CID>
  List Provider->>IPFS Node: List
  loop For each entry
    IPFS Node->>IPFS Node: Add entry to rule engine
  end
  User->>IPFS Node: ipfs://bafy...badcid
  IPFS Node->>IPFS Node: Process bafy...badcid through rule engine
  IPFS Node->>User: 403 Forbidden
```

### List Provider

A List Provider is an entity building and providing a list of content to be allowed/denied. They can provide their lists through the IPFS network or via [an HTTP Gateway endpoint](../http-gateways/README.md).

### IPFS Node

An IPFS node is a service that interacts with the IPFS network. This could be because it's providing content to the network, because it's retrieving content, or because it's serving IPFS hosted content through an HTTP interface.

To interact with content lists, it operates a rule engine. The rule engine decides what action should be taken for a particular request.
For instance, if CID bafy...badcid is denied, the bitswap engine should not request it, and access to bafy...badcid through a node exposed gateway are going to 403 forbidden.

### User

User is an actor that can make request to the IPFS Node. It's considered authenticated already.

> Access to the node can be made via an HTTP gateway, Bitswap, or another transport method exposed by the IPFS Node.

Reviewer: nit: covering more ground

```suggestion
Access to the node can be made via an HTTP gateway, command-line, RPC API, Bitswap, or another transport method exposed by the IPFS Node.
```

It is understood that the User might be in control of the IPFS Node, and is able to configure the rule engine as it suits them.

## Schemas

### Definition

The schemas below are defined as [IPLD schemas](https://ipld.io/specs/schemas/).

```ipldsch
type List struct {
  Action Int # Suggested action to be taken
  Categories optional [Int] # Content category entries should be associated to by default

  Entries EntryChunk # Chain of Entries included in the list

  Description optional String # Context to be shared with the list consumers
}

type EntryChunk struct {
  Entries [Entry] # List of Entries objects

>   Next optional Link # CID for the next EntryChunk object. Entries referenced this way are not inlined, and possibly require an additional request for discovery.

Reviewer: Having a single `Link` makes it:
- impossible to  compose a list from two preexisting ones (e.g., having "anti-phishing" meta-list composed of lists provided by gateways)
- expensive to maintain a big list (instead of having a DAG, and only recomputing changed branch, one needs to change all lists along the single chain).

Would it be ok to change this field into array of links?

```suggestion
  Next optional [Link] # List of CIDs for the next EntryChunk objects. Entries referenced this way are not inlined, and possibly require an additional request for discovery.
```

Author: What about having multiple `Entries [EntryChunk]` instead of multiple `Next [Link]`? I feel it makes it:
* Easier to read when lists are composed: it's simply a new EntryChunk.
* Does not modify a specific EntryChunk upon the addition of a new list.

Reviewer: - Yes, `[EntryChunk]` also works.  
  - Remaining problem around `Link` is that there is no place to provide description for it– If i am aggregating third-party lists into a single meta-lists, would be nice to note why each link was included. Maybe add `Description optional String` to `EntryChunk` ?
- re: max size, i only meant max size per document, encouraging people to "shard"  at the same cut-off and making it easier for implementers to fail fast when consuming a single document. (total across lists is a separate problem).

### IPFS Node

An IPFS node is a service that interacts with the IPFS network. This could be because it's providing content to the network, because it's retrieving content, or because it's serving IPFS hosted content through an HTTP interface.

To interact with content lists, it operates a rule engine. The rule engine decides what action should be taken for a particular request.
For instance, if CID bafy...badcid is denied, the bitswap engine should not request it, and access to bafy...badcid through a node exposed gateway are going to 403 forbidden.

### User

User is an actor that can make request to the IPFS Node. It's considered authenticated already.
Access to the node can be made via an HTTP gateway, Bitswap, or another transport method exposed by the IPFS Node.

It is understood that the User might be in control of the IPFS Node, and is able to configure the rule engine as it suits them.

## Schemas

### Definition

The schemas below are defined as [IPLD schemas](https://ipld.io/specs/schemas/).

```ipldsch
type List struct {
  Action Int # Suggested action to be taken

>   StatusCode optional Int # HTTP status code to be returned by IPFS gateways by default

Reviewer 2: Same comment as in https://github.com/ipfs/specs/pull/299#discussion_r934986343 this should be authoritatively limited.
I think anything not `451`, `410` or `200` has no place on a badlist list. I don't want people start to use 3xx or whatever.

Secondly, I don't fully understand why giving out HTTP codes, assuming the goal is to join forces and let gateway operators share ban reasons, **this is really unspecific**,
I would like a machine readable version enum, containing things like `Dos`, `Legal` (maybe with a reason like `Legal Copyright`, `Legal Hatespeech`, `Legal other`, ...), ...
Some gateway operators might prefer faking `500`s or just flat out ignore certain reasons.

Reviewer 3: > I would like a machine readable version enum, containing things like Dos, Legal (maybe with a reason like Legal Copyright, Legal Hatespeech, Legal other, ...), ...

❤️

Reviewer 4: Would remove the word "Legal" since not really a legal opinion or necessarily illegal depending on the jurisdiction.

>   StatusCode optional Int # HTTP status code to be returned by IPFS gateways by default

Author: I've added a comment to remove the HTTP specific handling.

  Entries optional Entry[] # Entries included in the list
  Imports optional Bytes # CID to a chain of entries included in the list

  Description optional String # Context to be shared with the list consumers
}

type Entry struct {

>   Type Int # Type of the content string. Refer to CID_V1, ABSOLUTE_PATH, PARTIAL_PATH, SHA256_CID_V1

Reviewer 5: There should be a type that has has exactly the same meaning as the current badbits anchor.

  Content String # Encoded content based on the Type
  Description optional String # Context to be shared with the entry consumers
  StatusCode optional Int  # HTTP status code to be returned by IPFS gateways for this specific Entry
}

type EntryImport struct {
  Entries Bytes[] # List of CID associated to Entry objects
  Next nullable Bytes # CID for the next EntryImport object
}
```

### Example

Here is a denylist in the proposed format.

```javascript
{
  Action: 2, // Action.BLOCK
  StatusCode: 451,
  Description: "Denylist of ACME Corp. on 1970/01/01",
  Entries: [
    {
      Type: 0, // Type.CID_V1
      Content: "bafybeihfqymzmqhbutdd7i4mkq2ltzznzgoshi4r2pnv4hsc2acsojawoe",
      Description: "ipfs quick start"
    },
    {
      Type: 1, // Type.ABSOLUTE_PATH
      Content: "/ipns/bad.example.com",
      Description: "Bad path"
    },
    {
      Type: 2, // Type.PARTIAL_PATH
      Content: "bag.again.example.com",
      StatusCode: 410
    },
    {
      Type: 3, // Type.SHA256_CID_V1
      Content: "9056e0f9948c942c16af3564af56d4bb96b6203ad9ccd3425ec628bcd843cc39",
      Description: "sensitive cid that needs to be blocked"
    }

>   ]

Reviewer 5: Note that it is very difficult to append anything to this list. You cannot have one process writing to it and another one reading from it at the same time. You need to open, read, deserialize, serialize, write, close.

That means that if you have an external process generating items to be blocked, every update needs to edit the file and then trigger the IPFS implementation to re-read it (possibly in full). Or the IPFS implementation needs to provide API to make the updates itself (and then write the file (again, possibly in full).

I have the feeling this format is not well suited to very large lists, or those updated frequently.

Reviewer: Would defining a max list size as part of this spec help?
Together with `Link` field, it allows for composing big lists from smaller ones, and updates would only change part of a bigger DAG.

Reviewer 5: That doesn't improve anything if instead of 1 item of 100GB we have 100 items of GB, somehow linked.

I also don't think the list format should include a Link field. Links to multiple lists etc should be a meta-format above that can be implemented later if we need some glue to handle multi-subscriptions (right now not needed).

I personally think lists should be line-based files, as small as possible, editable by hand for simple things like appending a CID. See lists used by UBlock etc.

Reviewer: ## Inefficiencies of CBOR lists vs prior art from adblockers

Ack. A compact, efficient, line-based syntax similar to [static filter lists used by adblockers](https://github.com/gorhill/uBlock/wiki/Static-filter-syntax) ([example](https://easylist.to/easylist/easylist.txt)) will be more efficient and easier to consume than having CBOR.

Main problem: duplicated  "Type" "Content" and "Description" strings for every entry – havign these strings over and over again in CBOR map keys gets very wasteful very fast if the list is big.

## Manifest vs Compact list

So.. this PR feels like the meta format for aggregating lists you describe.  In [the other comment](https://github.com/ipfs/specs/pull/340#discussion_r1026509423) @hsanjuan  suggested adding a type for already existing double hashed format from https://badbits.dwebops.pub, we could do the same here and specify a separate type for lists in the "compact syntax". 

I think we should decouple and work on these things in parallel (meta-manifest and the compact list formats).
Will make discussion more productive, and allow us to ship things faster (e.g., in Kubo, we need compact format sooner than the meta-manifest one: users should be able to self-service, will take time).

## Next steps

@hsanjuan i'd like to explore your proposal – would you have time to propose a syntax for compact list? 
(gist / hackmd is fine – I can turn it into a separate IPIP  if you have limited bandwidth – this way we could flesh it out without blocking this one, and then we can decide which approach makes more sense)

(side-question) @thibmeu how strong is the CBOR  requirement?

Author: `Entries` structure could be transformed to a CSV. That's also the reason why multihash is serialised to a string via multibase, so it's easier to export.
```
type,content,description,categories
1,/path/to/content,questionable content,1001 1002 1005
...
```
I agree this would be easier to update. Metadata around it could be passed as a frontmatter possibly
```
action: 1
categories: 1000 1001
description: an example content list
---
type,content,description,categories
1,/path/to/content,questionable content,1001 1002 1005
```

The front matter still allows for compostability with CBOR, but makes the list self contained in a text format if need be.

I would not worry about the existing format for bad bits list. It's a single list, and I would avoid requiring the spec and implementation to be constrained by one historical list instance (similar to Cloudflare safemode in a way).

I have no need for CBOR specifically, it's just a format supported by IPFS and to which an IPLD schema can serialise to.

Reviewer 5: > i'd like to explore your proposal – would you have time to propose a syntax for compact list?

yes, next week at some point? I have ideas but I also need to explain them (because they link to other aspects that are not related to the list itself), which takes more time. Format would be in the direction @thibmeu proposes.

|1|ABSOLUTE_PATH|Absolute path of a content from the root of a IPLD node|Path as a string|Requested path (either via https:// or ipfs://) starts with|
|2|PARTIAL_PATH|Part of a path of a content|Path as a string|Requested path contains|
|3|SHA256_CID_V1|SHA256 hased CID v1. This matches the [Double Hashing IPIP-334](https://github.com/ipfs/specs/pull/334).|SHA256 of the CIDv1 as a string|Requested CID v1 SHA256|
|4-255|Unassigned||||
|256-512|INTERNAL|This range can be used for private content type|||

> **Note on `SHA256_CID_V1` type**
>
> The main difference between non-hashed entries and hashed ones is that the CIDs or content paths in the entry will be hashed and no plaintext is shown in the list. Following the [bad bits](https://badbits.dwebops.pub/), each CID or content path is `sha256()` hashed, so it's easy to determine one way but not the other. The hashed entries are designed to store sensitive blocking items and prevent creating an easily accessible list of sensitive content.
>

> > Before the hashing, all CIDv0 in `CID_V1` field is converted to CIDv1 for consistency.

Reviewer 6: I'm super late to the party, and this is maybe fixed elsewhere, but I wanted to +1 @dokterbob's suggestion about salting the double hashes (and making sure that the salt doesn't match the one in the double-hashed DHT). Otherwise you're handing a treasure map to bad actors.

There's perhaps a broader discussion about the privacy properties that we need from such a system. These are all some form of private set intersection (PSI), where double hashing is the "naive" case — there are much more sophisticated techniques. (Fancier _does not_ nessesarily mean better, but may be worth exploring)
